Assignment 2: Application Development and
Database Index Structure Implementation
1. Project Objective
The objective of this assignment is to move from the database design phase (Assignment 1)
into active implementation through two independent modules.
InModule A,you will dive into low-level data structures by building a lightweight Database
Management System (DBMS) indexing engine from scratch.
InModule B,you will focus on high-level application logic by developing a secure, optimised
local web application with a Role-Based Access Control (RBAC) API layer.
Core Technical Pipeline:
Module A: Lightweight DBMS with B+ Tree Index.
•Core Data Structure Implementation:Implementing the B+ Tree logic from scratch,
ensuring correct node splitting, merging, and leaf-node linkage for exact and range
queries.
•DBMS Integration & Value Storage:Building the "Table" abstraction to associate stored
values (records) with keys in your tree, and managing these structures via a custom
Database Manager.
•Performance Benchmarking & Visualisation:Conducting a rigorous comparative analysis
(B+ Tree vs. Brute Force approach), generating performance graphs, and visualising the
tree structure using Graphviz.
Module B: Local API Development, RBAC, and Database Optimization.
•Local Database & UI Setup:Initialising a local database environment for your project-specific
tables and developing a web-based Member Portfolio UI.
•Secure API Integration & RBAC:Developing local REST APIs that handle CRUD operations,
validate sessions locally, enforce strict Role-Based Access Control (Admin vs. Regular
User), and maintain security audit logs.
•SQL Indexing & Profiling:Applying logical SQL indexing to your project tables to
optimise query execution, measuring performance benchmarks
Deadline
6:00 PM, 22 March 2026
Instructor:Dr. Y ogesh K. Meena
March 7, 2026 • Semester II (2025 - 2026) • CS 432 – Databases(Course Project/Assignment 2)
© 2026 Indian Institute of Technology, Gandhinagar. All rights reserved.

CS 432 Databases (Course Projects - Track 1/Assignment 2)2
1. Assignment Overview
This assignment consists ofTwo modules (Module A and Module B).
• Module A: Lightweight DBMS with B+ Tree Index (The "Engine")
• Module B: API Development & Security (The "Interface")
2. Module A: Lightweight DBMS with B+ Tree Index.
Y ou are required to implement a B+ Tree from scratch in Python. This structure will serve as the
indexing engine for your database, supporting efficient insert, update, delete, select, aggregation, and
range queries. Y ou will also conduct a performance analysis comparing your B+ Tree against a "Brute
Force" linear approach.
Introduction
Efficient data storage and retrieval are fundamental challenges in computer science, particularly in
database systems and file indexing. The B+ Tree is a self-balancing tree structure that improves
performance in both disk- and memory-based data management. It optimises search, insertion, and
deletion operations, making it widely used in database indexing, file systems, and key-value stores.
This assignment focuses on implementing a B+ Tree with essential operations, including insertion,
deletion, search, and range queries. Furthermore, a performance analysis is conducted by comparing
the B+ Tree with a brute-force approach. This will provide insights into how structured indexing improves
efficiency.
For More Understanding of the B+ tree and its implementation, this Y ouTube playlist might be helpful:B+
Trees
Implementation Details
Student should create their own separate database for module A
B+ Tree Features
Implement a B+ Tree with the following functionalities:
•Insertion:Keys are inserted while ensuring automatic node splitting.
•Deletion:Keys are removed with proper merging and redistribution.
•Exact Search:Ability to find whether a key exists in the tree.
•Range Queries:Retrieve all keys within a given range.
•Value Storage:Associate values (records for the table) with keys in the tree.
Performance Analysis
Compare the B+ Tree with theBruteForceDBapproach by measuring:
•Insertion Time:How long it takes to insert keys in both structures.
•Search Time:Compare the time taken for exact match searches.
•Deletion Time:Compare the time taken to delete the records.

CS 432 Databases (Course Projects - Track 1/Assignment 2)3
•Range Query Time:Measure the efficiency of retrieving keys in a range.
•Random Performance:Performance of random tasks (Insertion, Search, Deletion).
•Memory Usage:Track how much memory is used by each structure.
•Automated Benchmarking:Conduct multiple tests and collect results.
Visualization
Use Graphviz to visualise the tree structure:
•Tree Structure:Show the hierarchy of internal and leaf nodes.
•Node Relationships:Display parent-child relationships.
•Leaf Node Linkage:Highlight linked list connections in leaves.
Implementation Tasks
File Structure
db_management_system/
database/
__init__.py
db_manager.py # Database manager
table.py # Table implementation
bplustree.py # B+ Tree implementation
bruteforce.py # BruteForceDB
report.ipynb # Report and Visualizations
requirements.txt # Project dependencies
SubTasks
SubTask 1: Implement the B+ Tree
• DefineBPlusTreeNodeandBPlusTreeclasses.
• Implement insertion, deletion, search, and range queries.
• Ensure automatic splitting and merging of nodes.
SubTask 2: Implement Performance Analysis
• Create thePerformanceAnalyzerclass.
• Implement methods to measure time complexity and memory usage.
• Compare the B+ Tree with the brute-force approach (BruteForceDB).
SubTask 3: Implement Visualisation
• Use Graphviz (graphviz.Digraph) to visualise the tree.
• Implement node connections and leaf node linkages.

CS 432 Databases (Course Projects - Track 1/Assignment 2)4
SubTask 4: Conduct Performance Testing
• Generate different sets of random keys (e.g., usingrange(100, 100000, 1000)).
• Insert random key sets of different sizes into both data structures.
• Again, generate random key sets, perform search operations, and measure execution time.
• Do the same for range queries and delete operations; compare efficiency.
• Visualise the results using Matplotlib plots.
SubTask 5: Video Demonstration with Audio Explanation
Record a short screen-capture video (3–5 minutes) demonstrating your working B+ Tree implementation
and performance analysis.You must include a clear audio voice-over/explanationthat walks us
through your project. Y our video and audio explanation must clearly cover:
•Code & Functionality:Briefly show your B+ Tree structure and demonstrate the core operations
(insertion, deletion, search, and range queries) executing successfully in your notebook or terminal.
•Visualisation:Show the Graphviz visualisations of your tree, highlighting how nodes split or
merge and how leaf nodes are linked.
•Performance Analysis:Walk us through the Matplotlib graphs and benchmarking tables you
generated. Explain why the data looks the way it does (e.g., explaining the time complexity
difference between your B+ Tree and the BruteForceDB during range queries or large inserts).
Note: Host the video on a platform like Google Drive or Y ouTube (Unlisted) and include the link in your
report.ipynb file.
SubTask 6: Write a Report
Test the database created in a Jupyter notebook and document the following:
•Introduction:Explain the problem addressed and the proposed solution (B+ Tree DBMS).
•Implementation:Describe the implementation details of the B+ Tree operations.
•Performance Analysis:Present the benchmarking results using tables and graphs. Discuss the
findings.
•Visualisation:Include results of the generated tree visualisations of your database tables.
•Conclusion:Summarise the project findings, challenges, and potential future improvements.

CS 432 Databases (Course Projects - Track 1/Assignment 2)5
Evaluation Criteria
Criteria Marks
Implementation B+ Tree (insertion, deletion, search, range queries, value
storage)
20
Automated benchmarking and performance analysis (time/memory
comparison)
10
Visualisation using Graphviz Report and Video 10
Total 40

CS 432 Databases (Course Projects - Track 1/Assignment 2)6
3. Module B: Local API Development, RBAC, and Database Optimisation
In this module, you will focus on bringing the project-specific database schemas you designed in Task 1
to life. Y ou will develop a web UI and secure APIs to interact with your tables, manage core system data
locally, and implement strict Role-Based Access Control (RBAC). Finally, you will apply SQL indexing
to optimise your database access and quantitatively measure the performance improvements of your
queries. Y ou are free to choose your preferred tech stack, local server environment, and directory
structure for this assignment.
Prerequisites
1. Programming:Proficiency in your chosen backend language (e.g., Python, Node.js, Java) to
implement RESTful APIs and a frontend web UI.
2. Database Security:Understanding of authentication, session management, and Role-Based
Access Control (RBAC).
3. Database Optimisation:Understanding of SQL indexing strategies (e.g., B+ Trees, Hash
indexes) and query execution profiling.
SubTasks
SubTask 1: Local Environment Setup Data Management
Initialise your local database environment. Y ou must design a system that handles both your project-specific
tables (from Task 1) and core system data (which may include tables for members, user logins/credentials,
and member-to-group mappings, etc, based on your project).
•Member Creation/Deletion:When managing members, ensure corresponding entries in your
login and group mapping tables are handled correctly to maintain strict data integrity. Do not
duplicate core data (like user credentials) inside your project-specific tables.
SubTask 2: API and UI Development
Develop a web-based UI and the underlying local APIs to perform CRUD (Create, Read, Update, Delete)
operations on your project-specific tables.
• Ensure every API call validates the user’s session using a local authentication mechanism that
you develop.
•Member Portfolio:Create a portfolio feature in the UI that displays relevant details of members
within the project. Restrict access so that only authenticated users can view this, and users can
only view profiles they have permission to see.
SubTask 3: Role-Based Access Control (RBAC)
Implement strict role-based access control on your new UI and APIs:
•Admins:Should have full access to perform administrative actions (e.g., adding/deleting records,
managing group members across the core tables).
•Regular Users:Should have restricted access (e.g., read-only access, or only the ability to
modify their own specific portfolio records).

CS 432 Databases (Course Projects - Track 1/Assignment 2)7
• Whenever an API call modifies data in your database, ensure the changes are logged locally to a
file (e.g., audit.log) or a dedicated logging table.
• Any direct database modifications made without passing through your session-validated APIs
should be easily identifiable as unauthorized when reviewing these logs.
SubTask 4: SQL Indexing and Query Optimisation
Identify the most frequently accessed or slowest-performing API endpoints in your application.
• Apply appropriate SQL indexing (e.g., single-column, composite, or unique indexes) to your
project-specific tables to optimize data retrieval.
• Ensure your indexing strategy directly targets the WHERE, JOIN, or ORDER BY clauses used in
your API’s SQL queries.
SubTask 5: Performance Benchmarking
Quantitatively measure the impact of your SQL indexing:
• Record the API response times and the SQL query execution times before applying your indexes.
• Record the same metrics after applying your indexes.
• Use query profiling tools (e.g., the EXPLAIN statement) to document how the database engine’s
access plan changed (e.g., shifting from a full table scan to an index seek).
SubTask 6: Video Demonstration with Audio Explanation
Record a short screen-capture video (3–5 minutes) demonstrating your fully integrated local system.
You must include a clear audio voice-over/explanationthat walks us through your implementation.
Y our video and audio explanation must clearly cover:
•UI & API Functionality:Narrate your navigation of the web UI, viewing the Member Portfolio,
and successfully performing CRUD operations on your Task 1 tables.
•RBAC Enforcement:Explain how your roles are set up while logging in as an Admin (demonstrating
administrative access) and then as a Regular User (demonstrating restricted/read-only access).
•Security Logging Check:Briefly explain your logging mechanism while showing your local logs
capturing valid API operations and highlighting any flagged unauthorised database modifications.
Note: Host the video on a platform like Google Drive or Y ouTube (Unlisted) and include the link in your
report.

CS 432 Databases (Course Projects - Track 1/Assignment 2)8
Evaluation Criteria
Criteria Marks
Local DB & Secure API Implementation
(Core/Project setup, CRUD APIs, Session Validation, Member Portfolio) 20
Security & RBAC(Role enforcement, proper deletion integrity,
unauthorised access logging)
10
Database Optimization(Logical indexing strategy, query profiling,
benchmarking)
10
Optimization Report(Benchmarking graphs, EXPLAIN plan analysis,
documentation)
10
Video Submission & Audio Explanation(Clear narration and
demonstration of UI/API functionality, RBAC constraints, and logging)
10
Total 60
4. Submission Guidelines (Both modules)
Y ou are required to submit a single private GitHub repository link containing all the files for both modules.
Please organize your repository clearly with separate folders for Module A and Module B.
Repository Structure:Ensure your repository is structured logically.
Example:
CS432_Track1_Submission/
Module_A/
database/ (Contains bplustree.py, bruteforce.py, etc.)
report.ipynb (Benchmarking and Visualization)
requirements.txt
Module_B/
app/ (Contains API code, UI templates, auth logic)
sql/ (Contains database creation scripts)
logs/ (Contains audit.log)
report.pdf (or .ipynb)
requirements.txt
Module A Deliverables:
•Source Code:A database folder containing all Python scripts implementing the B+ Tree, BruteForceDB,
and performance analyser functionalities.
•Jupyter Notebook Report (report.ipynb):Must include:
– Introduction:Problem statement and solution overview.

CS 432 Databases (Course Projects - Track 1/Assignment 2)9
– Implementation Details:Explanation of your B+ Tree logic.
– Performance Analysis:Tables and Matplotlib graphs comparing B+ Tree vs. BruteForceDB
for insertions, deletions, searches, and range queries.
– Visualisations:Graphviz outputs showing your tree’s internal nodes, leaf nodes, and linkages.
– Conclusion:Summary of findings and challenges.
Module B Deliverables:
•Source Code Scripts:
–Complete source code for your web UI, local APIs, and local authentication/RBAC logic.
–SQL scripts are used to create your local core tables and project-specific tables.
•Security Logs:Provide your local log files (e.g., audit.log) demonstrating session validation for
API queries and highlighting flagged unauthorised database modifications.
•Optimisation Implementation Report:Prepare a report (PDF or Jupyter Notebook) documenting:
– Schema Design:How you structured your local core tables and project-specific tables to
maintain integrity without duplicating data.
– Security:How your session validation prevents data leaks and how your RBAC roles
(Admin vs. Regular User) are enforced.
– Indexing Strategy:Which columns you indexed and why (based on your API’s SQL queries).
– Performance Benchmarking:Quantitative results showing query execution times before
and after indexing.
• Video Demonstration: Place a clear link in your report to your 3–5 minute video demonstration.
Ensure the video includes your audio explanation, demonstrates UI/API functionality, shows the
Admin/Regular User RBAC constraints, and demonstrates the logging mechanism in action.
Ensure the link is accessible (e.g., an Unlisted Y ouTube video or an open Google Drive link).

CS 432 Databases (Course Projects - Track 1/Assignment 2)10
5. Appendix
A. B+ tree.py
This appendix provides the boilerplate code for the bplustree.py. There may be other functions required;
implement them accordingly.
1def search ( self, key ) :
2# Search for a key in the B+ tree. Return the associated value if found, else None.
3# Traverse from root to appropriate leaf node.
4pass
5
6def insert ( self , key , value ) :
7"""
8Insert key-value pair into the B+ tree.
9Handle root splitting if necessary
10Maintain sorted order and balance properties.
11"""
12pass
13
14def _insert_non_full ( self , node , key , value ) :
15# Recursive helper to insert into a non-full node.
16# Split child nodes if they become full during insertion.
17pass
18
19def _split_child ( self , parent , index ) :
20"""
21Split the arentchild at the given index
22For leaves:preserve the linked list structure and copy the middle key to the parent.
23For internal nodes: promote the middle key and split the children
24"""
25pass
26
27def delete ( self, key ) :
28"""
29Delete key from the B+ tree.
30Handle underflow by borrowing from siblings or merging nodes.
31Update the root if it becomes empty.
32Return True if deletion succeeded, False otherwise.
33"""
34pass
35
36def _delete ( self , node , key ) :
37# Recursive helper for deletion. Handle leaf and internal nodes .
38# Ensure all nodes maintain minimum keys after deletion.
39pass
40
41def _fill_child ( self , node , index ) :
42# Ensure child at given index has enough keys by borrowing from siblings or merging.

CS 432 Databases (Course Projects - Track 1/Assignment 2)11
43pass
44
45def _borrow_from_prev ( self , node , index ) :
46# Borrow a key from the left sibling to prevent underflow.
47pass
48
49def _borrow_from_next ( self , node , index ) :
50# Borrow a key from the right sibling to prevent underflow
51pass
52
53def _merge ( self , node , index ) :
54# Merge child at index with its right sibling. Update parent keys
55pass
56
57def update ( self , key , new_value ) :
58# Update value associated with an existing key. Return True if successful.
59pass
60
61def range_query ( self , start_key , end_key ):
62"""
63Return all key-value pairs where start_key <= key <= end_key.
64Traverse leaf nodes using the following pointers for efficient range scans.
65"""
66pass
67
68def get_all ( self ) :
69# Return all key-value pairs in the tree using in-order traversal.
70pass
71
72def visualize_tree ( self ):
73# Generate Graphviz representation of the B+ tree structure .
74pass
75
76def _add_nodes ( self , dot , node ) :
77# Recursively add nodes to Graphviz object (for visualisation.
78pass
79
80def _add_edges ( self , dot , node ) :
81# Add edges between nodes and dashed lines for leaf connections (for visualisation
82pass
Listing 1: Required B+ Tree methods

CS 432 Databases (Course Projects - Track 1/Assignment 2)12
B. BruteForceDB
This appendix provides the Python code for the BruteForceDB class, which serves as a baseline for
performance comparison against the B+ Tree. It uses a simple list to store keys and performs operations
through linear iteration.
11 class BruteForceDB :
22 def __init__ ( self ) :
33 self. data = []
44
55 def insert ( self key ) :
66 self. data append ( key )
77
88 def search ( self, key ) :
99 return key in self. data
1010
1111 def delete ( self key ) :
1212 if key in self data :
1313 self. data. remove ( key )
1414
1515 def range_query ( self , start , end ) :
1616 return [ k for k in self. data if start <= k <= end ]
Listing 2: BruteForceDB Class.

CS 432 Databases (Course Projects - Track 1/Assignment 2)13
API Documentation
/login (POST)
Description:Authenticates a user and issues a session token.
Arguments (JSON):
• user (string): Username.
• password (string): User’s password.
Returns:
• 200 (JSON): {
"message": "Login successful",
session token: ’jwt session token’
}
• 401 (JSON):
– {"error": "Invalid credentials"}
– {"error": "Missing parameters"}
on failure.
/isAuth (GET)
Description:Checks if a user’s session is valid.
Arguments:
• {
session token: ’JWT session token’
}
Returns:
• 200 (JSON): {"message": "User is authenticated", "username": string, "role": string, "expiry":
datetime} on success.
• 401 (JSON):
– {"error": "No session found"}
– {"error": "Session expired"}
– {"error": "Invalid session token"}
on failure.
/ (GET)
Description:Simple welcome endpoint.
Arguments:None.
Returns:
• 200 (JSON): {"message": "Welcome to test APIs"}.
March 7, 2026 • Semester II (2025 - 2026) • CS 432 – Databases (Course Project/Assignment 2)
© 2026 Indian Institute of Technology, Gandhinagar. All rights reserved.